Adds a "how to" for routed nic devices on VMs (#12107)
canonical/lxd: doc/howto/instances_routed_nic_vm.md

(instances-routed-nic-vm)=
# How to add a routed NIC device to a virtual machine

> When adding a [routed NIC device](../reference/devices_nic.md#nictype-routed) to an instance, the instance must be configured to use the link-local gateway IPs as default routes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When adding a {ref]`routed NIC device <nic-routed>` to an instance, you must configure the instance to use the link-local gateway IPs as default routes.
```

Reviewer: Using MyST references has the advantage that they keep working if we move files around, or move the section into a different file.

Author: Done.

For containers, this is configured for you automatically.
For virtual machines, the gateways must be configured manually or via a mechanism like `cloud-init`.

To configure the gateways with `cloud-init`, firstly initialize an instance:

    lxc init ubuntu:jammy jammy --vm

Then add the routed NIC device:

>     lxc config device add jammy eth0 nic nictype=routed parent=my-parent-network ipv4.address=192.0.2.2 ipv6.address=2001:db8::2

Reviewer 2: `s/eth0/enp5s0/` for consistency, please :)

Reviewer 2: Oh I hadn't thought of that, good point.

> Where `my-parent-network` is your parent network, and the IPv4 and IPv6 addresses are within the subnet of the parent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this command, `my-parent-network` is your parent network, and the IPv4 and IPv6 addresses are within the subnet of the parent.
```

Author: Changed.

Then set the following configuration on the instance:

>     lxc config set jammy cloud-init.network-config "$(cat <<EOF

Reviewer 2: I think the `$(cat << EOF` isn't needed as `"` can span multiple lines. That said I wonder if creating a cloud-init snippet file using cat+heredocs wouldn't be easier to grasp for the intended audience?

Author: Done.

    network:
      version: 2
      ethernets:
        enp5s0:
          link-local:
          - ipv4
          - ipv6
          routes:
          - to: default
            via: 169.254.0.1
          - to: default

>             via: fe80::1

Reviewer: What are these addresses? Will users know which to pick? Or is that in the netplan documentation?

Reviewer 3: They are the static link local next hop addresses used with routed nics. They are always the same values with routed NICs as lxd sets those addresses up on the host.

Reviewer: OK, great. I think that should be added to the intro paragraph for this command as well then, just to make it clear.

Author: I'll describe their purpose and link back to the routed nic reference as they are described there.

Author: Done.

>           addresses:

Reviewer 2: I don't know if LXD will have a DNS listener on `169.254.0.1`, but if it does, it'd be nice to add a `nameserver` section to the netplan config. If no such listener is created, we should maybe hint the reader that more steps are needed to have DNS resolution working.

Author: I'll add a `nameservers` section and tell the reader they need to change the value. I don't know what IP address I should put as the nameserver though.

Author: I've added `8.8.8.8` as a nameserver and said that this needs to be changed. I'm not particularly comfortable with that though, because it will not work out of the box.

@ru-fu shall I instead add a note where I am describing the netplan config and say that nameserver configuration is left to the user?

Reviewer 3: Yes just mention that it should be set to a valid DNS server IP.
If there is a lxdbr0 network on the host it can be set to that IP instead.

Reviewer: Your suggestion looks good to me. :-)

          - 192.0.2.2/32

>           - 2001:db8::2/128

Author: I guess I should mention that this is netplan configuration and link to their documentation?

Reviewer: Yes, I would add that before the command. Something like:
```
Then add the netplan configuration to `cloud-init`. See the [netplan documentation](...) for more information.
For example, use the following command:
```

(instances-routed-nic-vm)=
# How to add a routed NIC device to a virtual machine

When adding a {ref}`routed NIC device <nic-routed>` to an instance, you must configure the instance to use the link-local gateway IPs as default routes.
For containers, this is configured for you automatically.
For virtual machines, the gateways must be configured manually or via a mechanism like `cloud-init`.

To configure the gateways with `cloud-init`, firstly initialize an instance:

>     lxc init ubuntu:jammy jammy --vm

Reviewer 3: I think we use ubuntu:22.04 in rest of docs, please can you check if that is so and if it is align with that. Ta

Author: I've changed to `22.04` now.

Reviewer: Thanks, I missed that!

Then add the routed NIC device:

    lxc config device add jammy eth0 nic nictype=routed parent=my-parent-network ipv4.address=192.0.2.2 ipv6.address=2001:db8::2

In this command, `my-parent-network` is your parent network, and the IPv4 and IPv6 addresses are within the subnet of the parent.

Next we will create a `netplan` configuration file `netplan.yaml` to use with the instance:

    cat <<EOF > netplan.yaml
    network:
      version: 2
      ethernets:
        enp5s0:
          routes:
          - to: default
            via: 169.254.0.1
          - to: default
            via: fe80::1
          link-local:
          - ipv4
          - ipv6
          addresses:
          - 192.0.2.2/32
          - 2001:db8::2/128
          nameservers:
            addresses:
            - 8.8.8.8
    EOF

> This `netplan` configuration adds the {ref}`static link local next hop addresses <nic-routed>` (`169.254.0.1` and `fe80::1`) that are required.
> Additionally, we enable link local addressing for IPv4 and IPv6, and add the addresses we configured in our routed NIC device.
> Lastly we add a nameserver to enable DNS resolution within the instance.
> You should change this value to the IP address of a nameserver in the parent network.
> You can also add search domains here, for more information on `netplan` please see [their documentation](https://netplan.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This `netplan` configuration adds the {ref}`static link-local next-hop addresses <nic-routed>` (`169.254.0.1` and `fe80::1`) that are required.
Additionally, we enable link-local addressing for IPv4 and IPv6, and add the addresses we configured in our routed NIC device.
Lastly we add a name server to enable DNS resolution within the instance (make sure to change this value to the IP address of a name server in the parent network).
You can also add search domains here. 
For more information on `netplan`, see [their documentation](https://netplan.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).
```

Author: Done.

> Next we add this `netplan` configuration to the instance using the `cloud-init.network-config` configuration key:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we add this `netplan` configuration to the instance using the `cloud-init.network-config` configuration key:
```

    lxc config set jammy cloud-init.network-config "$(cat netplan.yaml)"

>   ```{note}
>   Before you start your instance, make sure that you have {ref}`configured the parent network <nic-routed>` to enable proxy ARP/NDP.
>   ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```{note}
Before you start your instance, make sure that you have {ref}`configured the parent network <nic-routed>` to enable proxy ARP/NDP.
```
````

I haven't checked now if it displays correctly, but I would be surprised if it does. ;)

Author: Fixed now though.

When adding a {ref}`routed NIC device <nic-routed>` to an instance, you must configure the instance to use the link-local gateway IPs as default routes.
For containers, this is configured for you automatically.
For virtual machines, the gateways must be configured manually or via a mechanism like `cloud-init`.

To configure the gateways with `cloud-init`, firstly initialize an instance:

    lxc init ubuntu:22.04 jammy --vm

Then add the routed NIC device:

    lxc config device add jammy eth0 nic nictype=routed parent=my-parent-network ipv4.address=192.0.2.2 ipv6.address=2001:db8::2

In this command, `my-parent-network` is your parent network, and the IPv4 and IPv6 addresses are within the subnet of the parent.

Next we will create a `netplan` configuration file `netplan.yaml` to use with the instance:

    cat <<EOF > netplan.yaml
    network:
      version: 2
      ethernets:
        enp5s0:
          routes:
          - to: default
            via: 169.254.0.1
          - to: default
            via: fe80::1
          link-local:
          - ipv4
          - ipv6
          addresses:
          - 192.0.2.2/32
          - 2001:db8::2/128
    EOF

> This `netplan` configuration adds the {ref}`static link local next hop addresses <nic-routed>` (`169.254.0.1` and `fe80::1`) that are required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This `netplan` configuration adds the {ref}`static link-local next-hop addresses <nic-routed>` (`169.254.0.1` and `fe80::1`) that are required.
```

Author: Done.

> Additionally, we enable link local addressing for IPv4 and IPv6, and add the addresses we configured in our routed NIC device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, we enable link-local addressing for IPv4 and IPv6, and add the addresses we configured in our routed NIC device.
```

Author: Done.

> For more information on `netplan` please see [their documentation](https://netplan.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on `netplan`, see [their documentation](https://netplan.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).
```

Author: Done.
